YTEP-0036.rst: converting from nose to pytest (#9)
yt-project/ytep: source/YTEPs/YTEP-0036.rst

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest --with-answer-testing --answer-raw-arrays --raw-answer-store

If the ``--raw-answer-store`` option is left off, then pytest will attempt to load in a set of previously generated arrays and perform a comparison to those generated during the current run.

Writing New Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Within the file containing the answer tests, one should define a new class that is marked by pytest as being an answer test. If the tests need to save data, they should utilize the ``hashing`` fixture. Additionally, if possible, the arguments passed to the test function should be parameterized. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    import pytest

    dsList = [some_dataset, other_dataset]
    param1List = [value1, value2]
    param2List = [value1, value2]

    @pytest.mark.answer_test
    class TestNewFrontend:
        answer_file = None
        saved_hashes = None

        @pytest.mark.usefixtures('hashing')
        @pytest.mark.parametrize("ds", dsList, indirect=True)
        @pytest.mark.parametrize("param1", param1List, indirect=True)
        @pytest.mark.parametrize("param2", param2List, indirect=True)
        def test_method1(self, ds, param1, param2):

>           test_result = some_answer_test(ds, param1, param2)
>           self.hashes.update({'some_answer_test' : test_result})

Reviewer: you can resolve my comment about styling with this
```suggestion
            test_result = some_answer_test(ds, param1, param2)
            self.hashes.update({'some_answer_test' : test_result})
```

YTEP-0036: Converting from Nose to Pytest
=========================================

Abstract
--------

Created: September 30, 2019
Author: Jared Coughlin

This YTEP proposes two major changes to yt's answer testing: to switch yt's testing framework from Nose to Pytest and to change yt's answer storing mechanism from storing whole arrays to storing hashes of those arrays.

Status
------

 #. Proposed

Project Management Links
------------------------

The conversions detailed in this YTEP have been implemented in `this pull request <https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/2286>`_.

Detailed Description
--------------------

Background
^^^^^^^^^^

Currently, testing in yt makes use of the `nose <https://nose.readthedocs.io/en/latest/>`_ framework. While perfectly functional, Nose has several drawbacks. First, it has been in a self-described maintenance mode for the last several years, which puts the project in danger of ceasing. Second, much of Nose's functionality comes from third-party plugins, which often have lacking or poor documentation. Third, beyond fairly basic setup and teardown fixtures, Nose lacks modularity and tests carry additional boilerplate code.

> The first proposal of this YTEP is to switch yt's testing framework from Nose to `pytest <http://pytest.org/en/latest/>`_. Pytest offers many of the same benefits of nose: automatic test discovery, the ability to selectively run tests, a large number of external plugins, the ability to be fine-tuned via configuration files, and compatibility with unittest. In addition to these benefits, pytest is also: actively maintained and developed, compatible with nose testing frameworks, and equipped with a fully-featured fixture system. In fact, this fixture system is arguably the best reason to use Pytest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first proposal of this YTEP is to switch yt's testing framework from Nose to `pytest <http://pytest.org/en/latest/>`_. Pytest offers many of the same benefits of nose: automatic test discovery, the ability to selectively run tests, a large number of external plugins, the ability to be fine-tuned via configuration files, and compatibility with `Python's standard library testing framework unittest <https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html#module-unittest>`_. In addition to these benefits, pytest is also: actively maintained and developed, compatible with nose testing frameworks, and equipped with a fully-featured fixture system. In fact, this fixture system is arguably the best reason to use Pytest.
```

Pytest fixtures, as described in the documentation, are explicit, modular, and easily scalable. This makes writing tests easier, faster, more flexible, and require less boilerplate. Additionally, pytest automatically collects and groups tests that share fixtures together, which can help minimize resource use.

The second proposal of this YTEP is a general reorganization and streamlining for yt's answer testing framework.

Currently, many answer tests in yt generate large arrays of data. In order to facilitate comparison, these arrays need to be saved. Unfortunately, their size necessitates that these answers be stored separately from the main yt code base and makes answer comparisons slow.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Synchronising pull-requests merging with two repos instead of one also slows down the development itself and creates technical debt.

```

Reviewer: @jcoughlin11 this comment is still not marked "outdated". Maybe it simply doesn't fit the doc anymore, in which case you can simply resolve this.

Reviewer: Oh wait it still applies. You can reject it if you want, no hard feelings.

Author: I added your suggestion as the third bullet point here. I can make it its own paragraph if you think that would fit better.

In an effort to combat these issues, this YTEP proposes implementing the answers as hashes of the generated array data. Since these hashes are short, simple strings, they can be stored in human-readable yaml files, take up much less disk space, and can facilitate more efficient comparisons when actually running the tests. As an added benefit, they can be packaged with the code itself, thereby making running and managing the answer tests much easier.

Converting to Pytest
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Currently, the answer tests are mostly implemented as yield tests using nose. Pytest no longer supports yield tests because they resulted in multiple test functions being generated (one for each parameter combination), and these generated test functions did not properly support fixtures, as described `here <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/deprecations.html#yield-tests>`_.

> The first step in reorganizing the tests is, therefore, to remove all yield tests. Each function that previously yielded a test now properly calls a test function with the desired parameters, where assertions are made. This makes the tests easier to read, as most of the boilerplate associated with yielding is gone (e.g., changing the ``__name__`` attribute of the yielded test class).

Reviewer: >  Each function that previously yielded a test now properly calls a test function with the desired parameters

I'm confused, it sounds more like an intermediate step than a desirable final state: shouldn't test function be self-contained ? I believe that test generation is roughly equivalent to `@pytest.mark.parametrize`, is there something I'm missing ?

> The second step is to organize the answer tests into classes (e.g., all of the enzo answer tests go in a class called ``TestEnzo``). This not only provides a natural organizational structure within the code itself, but it also provides a simple way of ensuring that all related answer tests get saved to the same answer file. The class structure also facilitates easier running of specific tests, especially in the case where answer tests and unit tests share the same module.

Reviewer: > all related answer tests get saved to the same answer file

why is this important ?

> The class structure also facilitates easier running of specific tests

I don't really get this last argument. pytest offers several ways to select a subset of test at runtime already based on names (`pytest -k`) or markers (`pytest -m`). Why do you think it's not enough ?

> As an extension of the above, each answer test (e.g., ``FieldValuesTest``) that was previously a class of its own is now a method (e.g., ``field_values_test``) of the base ``AnswerTest`` class, which resides in ``yt/utilities/answer_testing/framework.py`` and takes the place of the ``AnswerTestingTest`` class. The use of this base class provides a central location for any new answer tests that might be added in the future. Every class that performs answer testing (e.g. ``TestEnzo``) inherits from ``AnswerTest``, thereby giving it access to the methods of ``AnswerTest``.

Reviewer: I must be reading this wrong. Are you saying that those tests live in the `framework.py` ?

Upon reading a third time, I _think_ the source of my confusion is the phrasing of the first sentence. Specifically

> each answer test (e.g., ``FieldValuesTest``) 

I'm sure you mean something like "abstract answer test" here (I don't know of a better word here, sorry). In any case there's a distinction between generic/abstract tests and actual tests classes/functions, right ?
I think it should be clarified here and in the following.

> This structure removes the need for each individual answer test to have it's own ``__init__`` and ``compare`` methods. The test code is now exclusively what previously resided in the ``run`` method.

Reviewer: This isn't easy to follow without a minimal example of the before/after transformation, especially when the reader isn't familiar with the current (and soon, past) state of the framework.

> Several other changes have been implemented, as well. Previously, when running answer tests that used large data files, the ``--answer-big-data`` option had to be passed to nose. This remains the case, as described below. However, that option was previously passed to the decorators ``requires_ds`` and ``requires_sim``. This is no longer the case. Those decorators now only check to make sure the requested resource exists. The big data files are now handled by a pytest mark ``pytest.mark.big_data``. Further, these decorators used to ``return lambda: None`` whenever the desired resource was not found. Pytest did not recognize these lambdas as valid functions, and so they have been replaced with a ``skip`` method that also employs ``assert False`` in order to mark the test as failing.

Reviewer: Could you please add a reference to https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/2885 here ?
(wow I now feel like a typical science-article reviewer "please cite me more" :) )

The last change made to the code base in switching from nose to pytest is the addition of ``conftest.py`` files.  These are configuration files that are used by pytest in order to define custom fixtures for processes such as setup, teardown, parametrizing tests, and using temporary directories and files.

> The primary ``conftest.py`` file resides in the root of the yt repo and it defines the command-line parser as well as the fixtures used across each of the answer tests. Additionally, other ``conftest.py`` files have been defined in each of the frontend directories in order to define fixtures for loading specific data files, and using ``pytest_generate_tests`` to parametrize those answer tests that require it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary ``conftest.py`` file resides in the root of the yt repo and defines the command-line parser as well as the fixtures used across each of the answer tests. Additionally, other ``conftest.py`` files have been defined in each of the frontend directories in order to define fixtures for loading specific data files, and using ``pytest_generate_tests`` to parametrize those answer tests that require it.
```

> 

Reviewer: I would like to propose to add a paragraph here on means to "test the tests", tools that we can use along the way to help validate the reimplementation of certain tests.

I think this plugin is an example of such tools : it shuffles the execution order of tests each time pytest is called, making sure that we don't accidentally and unknowingly end up writing tests that only happen to pass because of the specific order they are run in, which can happen when tests have global side effects (which can be unpredictable, hard to trace and not desired)
https://pypi.org/project/pytest-randomly/3.4.0/

I'm also thinking we could use coverage reports and badges to get a sense of progression going (even though I know we won't be converging towards 100%, it would still be very satisfying to see the pytest-coverage ratio being bumped with each PR, and let's not undermine the endorphin kick !)

(maybe this belongs to a different section, you decide)

Author: I added a section discussing this. Let me know your thoughts!

Hash Implementation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In order to generate appropriate hashes, each method of ``AnswerTest`` that returns an array now has that array hashed via the ``hashing`` fixture defined in the central ``conftest.py`` file. This fixture saves the arguments that the test function employed (e.g., what field it was parametrized with) and then makes use of the ``md5`` method of the ``hashlib`` library to get the hash as a string of hexadecimal digits.

Reviewer: While looking for a reference for this, I stumbled upon this https://docs.python.org/3/library/hashlib.html

> md5() is normally available as well, though it may be missing or blocked if you are using a rare “FIPS compliant” build of Python

But my main issue is that there's nothing else there :/
So my question is: why choose this particular hashing method ?

> In order to facilitate easier diagnosis of failing tests, each combination of test parameters receives its own hash. For example, if the ``field_values_test`` is being run on each field in ``ds.field_list``, then each call to ``field_values_test`` will generate its own hash. These hashes are then saved in a ``dict`` whose keys are the test parameter values (in this case, the field name). Once completed, these are written to yaml files with the following format:

Reviewer: The end essentially reads "a dict whose keys are values", which is very confusing within the context of the Python language. Here's a rewording proposal

```suggestion
In order to facilitate easier diagnosis of failing tests, each combination of test parameters receives its own hash. For example, if ``field_values_test`` is being run on each field in ``ds.field_list``, then each call to ``field_values_test`` will generate its own hash. These hashes are then saved in a mapping of parameter names and values. Once completed, these are written to yaml files with the following format:
```

.. code-block:: yaml

  calling_function_name:
    test_name: hash
    test_parameter1_value1: value
    test_parameter2_value1: value

> This produces small, human-readable text files that can be easily packaged with the main code base. This makes running and managing the tests simpler.

Reviewer: I dare say 😄 
```suggestion
This produces small, human-readable text files that can be easily packaged with the main code base. This makes running and managing the tests a lot simpler.
```

> The saving, loading, and comparison of the generated hashes has been implemented in a new convenience function ``handle_hashes(save_dir, save_file, hashes, answer_store)`` in ``yt/utilities/answer_testing/utils.py``.

Reviewer: `utils` gives basically no information on the content, which makes the code  unnecessarily harder to navigate _and_ to maintain. It opens the way for future additions that don't fit the original scope of the file, because it's not well reflected in it's name. This files has "utils" _and_ "utilities" as 2 of the 4 components of its path, and another one is the package name. (did I say I didn't like it ?)

Anyway this files predates the YTEP, but I'd like to point out that its name is not descriptive enough to my taste and I'd like to suggest we seize the opportunity to change it (or move your new stuff to somewhere else).

The ``save_dir`` argument is the path to the directory where the answers are either to be saved or loaded from, the ``save_file`` argument specifies the name of the answer file to either save to or load from, the ``hashes`` are the newly generated data to be either saved or loaded, and the ``answer_store`` argument specifies whether or not the passed data should be saved or compared.

> If ``answer_store`` is ``True`` then the passed ``hashes`` should be written to the specified yaml file. If ``answer_store`` is ``False`` then the passed ``hashes`` should be compared to the hashes loaded from the specified answer file.

Reviewer: which arguments are you talking about ? I fell like a sentence or two went missing. Also here a minimal example would help tremendously.

edit: after reading the following I think you meant command line flags, but I still don't get from the examples how the storage files are supposed to be specified. This should be clarified here.

edit2: ok so the storage (yaml) files are in fact configured in another yaml file, which belong to the repo ? In the context of command line argument/flags parsing, I think the word "configured" is less error-prone than "specified".

Running the Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unit Tests
""""""""""

The goal was to keep the process as similar to the previous implementation as possible. Previously, unit tests could be run from the command line in the ``$YT_GIT`` directory (where this refers to the root of the yt repo) as

.. code-block:: bash

  $ nosetests

Similarly, now they can be run with

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest

> Should one desire to disable pytest's default capturing of ``stdout``, the ``-s`` option can be invoked. If one would like a verbose description of the tests being run as well as their status (and a detailed report in the event of a failure), one can enable the ``-v`` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Should one desire to disable pytest's default capturing of ``stdout``, the ``-s`` option can be invoked. If one would like a verbose description of the tests being run as well as their status (and a detailed report in the event of a failure), one can enable the ``-v`` flag (or ``-vv`` and ``-vvv`` for even finer reports).
```

To run a specific test or group of tests, one can either pass in the path to the module containing the tests

.. code-block:: bash

>   $ pytest -s -v /path/to/test/module.py

Reviewer: remove the unnecessary, and show a realistic example of a test file as discovered by pytest
```suggestion
  $ pytest /path/to/tests/test_module.py
```

Reviewer: updated this comment, still relevant @jcoughlin11

or use pytest's powerful ``-k`` flag, which enables test selection by name. For instance, to run all of the tests contained in a single class, one would do:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest -s -v -k "TestClass"

and pytest will collect every test and then ignore all of the tests not contained in the ``TestClass`` class. To run only a specific method within a given class, one would do:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest -s -v -k "TestClass and test_method"

See `this link <https://docs.pytest.org/en/latest/usage.html#specifying-tests-selecting-tests>`_ for more on pytest's selection capabilities and options.

Answer Tests
""""""""""""

To run the answer tests previously, one had to first tell yt where the test data used in the answer tests was located via

.. code-block:: bash

  $ yt config set yt test_data_dir /path/to/yt-data

> This remains true here, as well.

Reviewer: Not _exactly_ true anymore. Since https://github.com/yt-project/yt/pull/2981, it's now possible to have _local_ config files for yt. A side effect is that one can have as many data storage files as yt clones on a single machine.
However, the command line `yt` tool still only affects the global config file _unless specified otherwise_.
There no need to get into the details here but maybe a footnote could help.

Previously, to run the answer tests for a specific frontend, one would do:

.. code-block:: bash

>   nosetests --with-answer-testing --local --local-dir $HOME/Documents/test --answer-store --answer-name=local-tipsy yt.frontends.tipsy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  $ nosetests --with-answer-testing --local --local-dir $HOME/Documents/test --answer-store --answer-name=local-tipsy yt.frontends.tipsy
```

    - /path/to/file2/that/uses/these/answers.py
    ...

Now the format is:

.. code-block:: yaml

  TestClassName1:
    answer_file_name1_xyz.yaml
  TestClassName2:
    answer_file_name2_xyz.yaml
  ...

The ``xyz`` identifier is used to identify certain answer changesets. Comparing against a different answer changeset requires only changing that identifier in the ``tests.yaml`` file.

There are several answer tests (e.g., ``TestArt.test_d9p``) that use particularly large data files. Previously, to run these tests, they had to be specifically selected via the ``--answer-big-data`` command line option. This remains the case:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ pytest --with-answer-testing --answer-store --answer-big-data -k "TestArt and test_d9p"

Writing New Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If one is writing tests for a new frontend, one should create a ``tests`` directory inside of the new frontend directory and, within the ``tests`` directory, create a file called ``test_outputs.py``. Within this file, one should define a new class that inherits from ``AnswerTest`` and is marked by pytest as being an answer test. All of the frontend tests should now be methods of this class. For example:

> .. code-block:: python

Reviewer: note that this Python example code doesn't follow yt's code style (mostly black)
Fortunately, you can use this tool to get there in a second https://pypi.org/project/blacken-docs/

Reviewer: @jcoughlin11 the test method still has a clunky indentation. Please resolve this thread when you're done updating it :)

  import pytest

  from yt.utilities.answer_testing import framework as fw
  from yt.utilities.answer_testing import utils

  # The first decorator tell pytest to skip the tests in this class if the
  # --with-answer-testing option was not passed on the command line. The
  # second decorator tells pytest to use the answer_file fixture, which
  # properly sets TestNewFrontend answer_file
  @pytest.mark.answer_test
  @pytest.mark.usefixtures('answer_file')
  class TestNewFrontend(fw.AnswerTest):
    # By using the hashing fixture, all of the data stored in test_result
    # will be hashed upon the method's completion
    @pytest.mark.usefixtures('hashing')
    @utils.requires_ds(test_data_file)
    # The method can be parametrized in the conftest.py file. See below
    def test_method1(self, param1, param2):
      ds = utils.data_dir_load(test_data_file)
      test_result = self.some_answer_test(ds, param1, param2)
      self.hashes.update({'some_answer_test' : test_result})

If desired, each test method can be individually parametrized by creating a ``conftest.py`` file next to the ``test_outputs.py`` file. The example above would utilize this file like so:

> .. code-blocK:: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

  def pytest_generate_tests(metafunc):
    if metafunc.function.__name__ == 'test_method1':
      metafunc.parametrize('param1', list_of_param1_values, ids=list_of_param1_ids)
      metafunc.parametrize('param2', list_of_param2_values, ids=list_of_param2_ids)

This ``pytest_generate_tests`` function will generate a separate test function for each combination of values in the two parameter lists. To parametrize against multiple parameters without having every combination:

> .. code-blocK:: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

  def pytest_generate_tests(metafunc):
    if metafunc.function.__name__ == 'test_method1':
      metafunc.parametrize('param1, param2', list_of_parameter_combination_tuples, ids=list_of_ids)

That is, one must generate a list whose elements are ``(param1, param2)`` tuples.

If one is writing a new answer test (such as the ``field_values_test``), one should make the test a method of the ``AnswerTest`` class. For example:

.. code-block:: python

  # This is in yt/utilities/answer_testing.framework.py
  class AnswerTest:
    # The other methods are here. New method goes below

>     def my_new_answer_test(self, test_param1, test_param2):

Reviewer: what are the test discovery rules ? I'm wondering if `my_new_answer_test` is actually a "valid" test name according to pytest's default rules.

Reviewer: The part of the doc this comment applied too has been removed, but my question hasn't been answered (unless the answer is in the new version, but I'm not looking at it right now. In this case, please resolve this thread @jcoughlin11).

      # Do stuff
      return result

> Any new frontend must have its tests registered and assigned an answer file. This should be done by updating ``yt_repo/tests/tests.yaml`` with:

Reviewer: Hurray, that's a small doc PR we can do !

.. code-block:: yaml

  TestNewFrontend:
    answer_file_name_000.yaml

> Optionally, any new fixtures that you might define and use should go in the top-level ``conftest.py``, unless they are frontend specific, in which case they should go in a ``conftest.py`` file that resides in the ``frontends/my_new_frontend/tests`` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, any new fixtures that one might define and use should go in the top-level ``conftest.py``, unless they are frontend specific, in which case they should go in a ``conftest.py`` file that resides in the ``frontends/my_new_frontend/tests`` directory.
```

The ``save_dir`` argument is the path to the directory where the answers are either to be saved or loaded from, the ``save_file`` argument specifies the name of the answer file to either save to or load from, the ``hashes`` are the newly generated data to be either saved or loaded, and the ``answer_store`` argument specifies whether or not the passed data should be saved or compared.

If ``answer_store`` is ``True`` then the passed ``hashes`` should be written to the specified yaml file. If ``answer_store`` is ``False`` then the passed ``hashes`` should be compared to the hashes loaded from the specified answer file.

Running the Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Unit Tests
""""""""""

This section covers how to actually run the existing answer tests. The goal was to keep the process as similar to the previous implementation as possible. Previously, unit tests could be run from the command line in the ``$YT_GIT`` directory (where this refers to the root of the yt repo) as

.. code-block:: bash

  $ nosetests

Similarly, now they can be run with

.. code-block:: bash

>   $ pytest

Reviewer 2: Does this still only run the unit tests or does it run the answer tests too?

Reviewer 2: Ah I see below it doesn't. Maybe note that here explicitly?

Author: Done.

.. code-block:: python

  from collections import OrderedDict
  import pytest

  from yt.utilities.answer_testing import framework as fw
  from yt.utilities.answer_testing import utils

  # The first decorator tell pytest to skip the tests in this class if the
  # --with-answer-testing option was not passed on the command line. The
  # second decorator tells pytest to use the answer_file fixture, which
  # properly sets TestNewFrontend.answer_file
  @pytest.mark.skipif(not pytest.config.getoption('--with-answer-testing'))
  @pytest.mark.usefixtures('answer_file')
  class TestNewFrontend(fw.AnswerTest):
    @utils.requires_ds(test_data_file)
    def test_method1:
      ds = utils.data_dir_load(test_data_file)
      hashes = OrderedDict()
      hashes['field_values'] = OrderedDict()
      fields = ds.field_list
      dobjs = [None, ('sphere', ('max', (0.1, 'unitary')))]
      for f in fields:
        hashes['field_values'][f] = OrderedDict()
        for d in dobjs:
          hashes['field_values'][f][d] = utils.generate_hash(self.field_values_test(ds, f, d))
      hashes = {'test_method1': hashes}

>       utils.handle_hashes(self.save_dir, self.answer_file, hashes, self.answer_store)

Reviewer 2: It seems like a lot of this code is going to get repeated across all the answer tests in all the frontends. Might it be possible for the `AnswerTest` class to handle allocating the `hashes` dict, hashing the data, and storing the hashes for each test?
